All right, let's continue on our journey and running through different examples in relativistic mechanics,
so you can get used to trying to take all the puzzle pieces or tools we've put together in this course,
slapping together to see the big picture and solve problems and do different kind of analysis.
OK, now the problem which we're going to work on today in this video is that of a lambda particle.
Now what you're going to learn in maybe quantum mechanics or a particle physics course is that this
particle known as a land, a particle, it's a subatomic particle.
Sometimes it's going to spontaneously decay into two other subatomic particles a proton and a pion.
If the name is confusing, if you haven't seen this before, don't worry about that.
This sort of trying to emulate a real life situation, so there's some context behind it.
But if you don't get what's going on here, that's fine.
That's not the main inside.
This example, which to focus on are the parameters that are provided, such as the momentum, the mass,
so on and so forth.
OK.
So in this problem, states allow the particle is a subatomic particle, which can sometimes spontaneously
decay into a proton and a negatively charged pion, as depicted below.
The problem states that if the momentum of the outgoing particles in the same direction, so the traveling
in the same direction after decays are measured to be 581 mega electron volts over C and 256 mega electron
volts, or C proton.
The Pi on respectively determined the mess of the lambda particle.
Now this kind of problem is pretty cool because in a real life situation, it's pretty easy to measure
the momentum of particles flying through different apparatuses.
Right?
For example, if we had a magnetic field that was going into the board as such, and I'm just providing
some context and cool context to the problem before we actually run through it, what we would find
is that these guys driving in this direction.
Remember what I said about the Reds force?
We had a force equal to Q V Cross B as such.
So the R A V crossed B, right?
We're going to get a vector if it goes up or down, depending on whether goes into the board or it comes
out OK.
So as a result of that, we're going to get some force that one, this is moving.
It wants to push it up.
And what's going to happen is the particle is going to curve.
You're going to get some curvature.
What you can do, you can measure the radius of that curvature.
And there are different parameters, different equations you can derive to figure out how you can link
all these guys.
But using that, you can figure out pretty precisely the velocity here and that can tell you the momentum
pretty easily, OK?
So.
In a real life situation, you can use everything we're going to do in this problem to actually determine
and measure the mass of a particle that decays or some initial particle very accurately.
So this kind of problem is very practical.
It gives you an opportunity to practice special relativity, but it's also something you could employ
in a real life situation.
OK, so you know, all these problems, and I consider this sort of like the first challenging, somewhat
challenging problem we've ran through example problem.
What you want to do is you want to take all the promise.
You're given all the puzzle pieces and collect them and document them.
Right.
So these problems sometimes become a problem of accounting.
OK, so what I like to do is when I wrote up my problem statements, I only got a column where I have
given parameters.
I'm going to use this as such, and I write down literally what I had.
We were given the momentum of the proton and the pion as such and what we can do or what you will be
doing and a lot of special relativity problems is you will be looking at the masses, all the different
particles that are associated in this problem and that is usually your first step in your giving.
So you would want to look up the proton.
You can look up.
It's nice.
It's 938 megawatt, Turnbull's prestige squared, and you could also look up the pylon in a particle
physics book.
Or you can use Google to look it up pretty quickly.
So the mass of a pion, if you did that, you fine.
It's 140 mega electron volts overseas, where if you want to pause this video and try and confirm this.
See if you can find that it should be pretty close.
You might have small discrepancies based upon your source and the level of accuracy associated with
that measurement, but you should be able to look.
These are pretty easy to get used to doing that.
Be comfortable looking up the mess of different particles when you're doing special relativity problems.
OK, so next what you want to do is you have all the puzzle pieces laid out.
Now you want to see, OK, are they compatible?
How can they fit together with the tools I have?
I'll be providing you with the equation sheet.
You should use an equation sheet.
So, you know, you say, Oh, I got these variables, how can I fit them in with my different tools
to paint a picture of what's going on here?
And if you do that, you'll say, OK, I have the momentum.
I have mass.
Well, if I take our energy momentum relationship that we derive previously, I can determine the total
energy because in this recipe for a puzzle, right, we have this puzzle piece with the the momentum
we have the rest energy with mass.
The only unknown is the energy.
So I could use this plug and shock to figure out the energy of both particles at the end.
OK, and then maybe I can use conservation of energy, but let's focus on this initial part.
OK, so we could take this guy.
And again, as I said, we know PC and M.S. Square the rest of energy for both particles.
What we can do is you take a square root on both sides.
We end up with this guy right here.
All we need to do is just plug and chug.
All right.
So we do it for both particles to figure out the total energy of both these guys.
And what we find is that the proton, right?
We plug in PPC and PC squared into the equation.
We got 581 for the momentum.
And again, this shows the analytical efficiency associated with the units we're using here because
again, PC, the C cancels out.
We kick that guy out.
We get the energy term thoroughly for the mass.
The rest energy 938 mega electron volts per squared band kicked out C squared out.
We got the energy right there.
So we take this expression, we evaluate it.
And the result we end up with the total energy is 11 03 mega electron volts for that proton.
OK.
From a negatively charged PI on what we end up with, we do the same exact exercise.
We have this equation here.
We plug in should plug in those parameters.
We take the momentum of the power and that's the pion.
Put these guys in.
We kick off their C or C squared terms and we end up with the following.
So this guy becomes 256 mega electron volts squared and then this guy becomes 140 mega electron volts
squared.
We add them together.
Take the square root bam.
We figure out that the PI on has a total energy of two hundred and ninety two mega electron volts.
Now we want to take a pause and say, OK, we know the energy, we know the momentum, we know the mass
of the products.
How do we figure out the mass of the parent particle, the lambda particle?
How do we do that?
Well, what we can do is we can say what?
What kind of tools do we have?
Well, we know from conservation of energy that the initial energy must be equal to the final energy
because we cannot really create nor destroy energy, right?
We may convert between different types, but we cannot create or destroy it.
So we would expect that if we took conservation of energy, we know the end products right here.
We could figure out the initial product of Lambda Guy, and that's the approach we want to take.
OK, so we could figure out energy.
Let's do that.
All right.
The initial energy must equal the final energy.
And we know that initially we had the energy of the land, the particle that decays, and then we get
these guys right.
So initially we had the land particle and that has to be converted into the energy of a proton and the
energy of the plant.
Again, this is going to the rest, the energy and the kinetic energy of this guy.
And we know from previous studies that if this guy was at rest, some of the best inside of it would
have to be converted to kinetic energy.
It would have to be utilized, right?
We saw that previously.
And that's why conservation of mass tenant hold, we see that full force right here in this equation.
OK, so we got this guy.
We can determine the energy of this initially by literally adding the two to energy as we determine
so.
The energy, the proton from the energy and pylon, we plugged them straight in 11 or three million
electron volts, plus 292 mega electron volts band.
We got the total energy of our initial system of that lambda particle, which is thirteen ninety five
mega electron volts.
Now the next thing you must be thinking, OK, we want to find the mass.
This guy pretty accurately.
And that's sort of the intent of an experiment of this nature where we have these different parameters
that we're measured.
What in the world do we do?
What what do we do?
I have the energy.
How can I get the mass?
Well, this is the total energy, so I can't really use the rest energy.
I would need the kinetic energy.
But what do I know?
I know.
The momentum of this guy in the mantle of this guy, and I know that I have another puzzle piece our
conservation law conservation momentum that says that momentum is conserved.
So the initial momentum of this guy must equal the final momentum of these two guys.
And what we see, if we do that, we can say the initial item by item item of the land.
The particle must equal the momentum of the proton and the momentum of the PI on some together.
Now we plug in shot.
So for a proton, we literally get 581 mega electron volts of C, plus the pilot 256 mega lightning
bolts oversea.
Add them together.
Bam, what do you get?
Yeah, this guy right here we get 837 mega electron volts over.
See?
And at this point, we should have a a ha moment.
We got.
We got energy.
We got momentum.
What's the third term we usually have in a relationship?
Oh, bam, that's the mass that we're looking for.
So we pull this trick out of our rat hat and we employ it.
Or, in other words, using the different metaphor, a different analogy.
We take this puzzle piece, combine it with these puzzle pieces.
We just arrived and we're going to get the full picture that full final picture we want regarding the
mass of this particle.
So when we do that, we know that e squared off lambda must equal the momentum of time C squared off
lambda, plus the rest the energy of lambda squared.
OK.
So if we take this, we want to isolate the mass.
What we could do is we could say e squared minus PC squared is equal to end, not c squared.
And I sort of skipped some steps here due to the size of my board.
But you can see what we're doing here, literally.
Again, e squared minus PC squared, we take the square root of them.
That's where we got this.
Then we end up with the energy squares we have to divide by a c squared and that guy sort of comes along
for the ride.
We don't want to throw in the speed of light.
And again, this is what makes our units so useful.
So this is a very easy calculation.
Again, all we need to do is plug in the unknowns that we get the final result.
So we know the total energy that 395 mega electron volts.
Square that term and then subtract the momentum.
Turn right.
The CIA down here cancels out that the efficiency of our units, so we square that term and then track
it from this guy.
Take the square root and then on the outside, we divide by a C squared.
And the net effect is we have this nice, easy calculation which tells us precisely.
That's.
This guy, the mess is one thousand one hundred and sixteen mega electron volts per C squared.
So.
If whatever reason you determined an unknown particle without a previously calculated mass.
What you could do is, you know, you could get magnetic fields, you can measure the magnetic field.
You can have these guys flying through that magnetic field.
And then when it decays right, you can measure literally literally measure the velocity by taking or
rather tracking the trajectory of that particle.
Figuring out the radius.
Right.
You can figure out relativistic forces, you can use that Lawrence force.
And then you can backtrack the momentum and also the velocity and go through this little exercise here
to literally figure out with a very precise accuracy.
This will be tied to the way in which you measure that radius.
If you have a good measurement of that radius, you get a very accurate measurement of the mass of this
guy.
And that's something you could do in a particle accelerator, a benchtop experiment, even maybe in
CERN somewhere.
But this would be a very useful tool for experimentally determining the mass of some of these particles.
And it could also allow you to identify different problems if you didn't even know what this was previously,
how you could determine the mass and the pair that up with previously identified masses.
So, yes, this is an example of how you figure out how you would employ ideas and concepts and special
relativity, but it's practical.
You could use it to turn the mass in and experiment so you can add this to your bag of tricks.
Your bag of puzzle piece.
Right?
So that's special relativity of relativistic mechanics here at the two examples.
I love to show you how units really drove the analysis forward and how special relativity is really
trying to figure out how energy, momentum and rest energy come into play, how they can be related
and how it can use our conservation laws to pull out different parameters we're interested in.
And everything else is just literally bookkeeping and plugging and chugging.
All right.
I hope you enjoyed that.
VIDEO.
Next, we're going to take a look at something what's very interesting something known as a photon.
And we're going to figure out the energy of a massless particle.
Stay tuned.